GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Iraq's prime minister
visits war-torn Ramadi after
government forces
take the city back from ISIS.
Also ahead this Tuesday: The
World Health
Organization announces Guinea is
now Ebola-free,
after being the first country
hit with the
deadly outbreak nearly two years
ago.
And how Puerto Ricans are
dealing with water
rationing during an extreme
drought.
LUIS TORRES, Puerto Rico: We
can't run if
we don't have water. If we want
to open the
doors, we have to have water.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: A white Chicago
policeman pleaded
not guilty today in the killing
of black teenager
Laquan McDonald. That case
sparked local protests
and gained national attention.
Jason Van Dyke was arraigned on
charges of
first-degree murder and official
misconduct.
Police video released last month
showed him
shooting McDonald 16 times.
Meanwhile, in Cleveland,
protesters gathered
a day after a grand jury refused
to indict
two police officers for killing
Tamir Rice.
The 12-year-old was shot dead in
November
of last year.
This morning, Mayor Frank
Jackson said the
city wants to address public
anger, in part
with a special committee to
examine the case.
FRANK JACKSON, Mayor of
Cleveland: The grand
jury has said that there's been
nothing done
wrong criminally. We are
reviewing , based
on what we have seen, whether or
not something
has been done administratively.
A 12-year-old
lost his life. Something
happened.
GWEN IFILL: Attorneys for the
accused officers
reiterated today that their
clients didn't
know Rice was only 12 or that he
had a toy
gun, not a real one.
In Pakistan today, a suicide
bomber blew himself
up outside a government office,
killing at
least 26 people and wounding
scores more.
It happened in the northwestern
city of Mardan,
near Peshawar, in a province
bordering Afghanistan.
The bomber opened fire, then
detonated his
suicide jacket at a national
registration
office. Many of the victims were
there to
receive identification cards.
MAN (through translator): I was
praying in
my house when the blast
occurred. It was a
huge blast. When I came running
here, there
were dead bodies lying all
around. It was
like doomsday. Body parts were
scattered on
the ground. Rescue workers were
picking up
dead bodies and putting them
into vehicles.
GWEN IFILL: An offshoot of the
Pakistani Taliban
claimed responsibility for the
attack.
Police in Belgium have arrested
two people
in a possible plot to stage
attacks around
New Year's. Brussels' main
square is popular
with tourists this time of year
and was allegedly
one of the targets. Authorities
say the plotters
had military-type uniforms and
Islamic State
propaganda.
Back in this country, days of
heavy rain triggered
flooding along the Mississippi
River today,
inundating small towns in
Missouri and Illinois.
The rising tide also shut down
parts of two
interstate highways and forced
residents of
West Alton, Missouri, to
evacuate their homes.
Governor Jay Nixon warned the
worst is yet
to come.
GOV. JAY NIXON (D), Missouri: We
have got
a lot more water coming. We try
to stay in
front of it as best we can.
Today is Tuesday.
And, as I said before, we're
looking at Thursday
night or Friday morning for that
-- that crest,
so we have 36, 48 hours to get
ready for the
top.
GWEN IFILL: Later, the governor
activated
the National Guard.
Elsewhere, heavy rain continues
in Georgia
and Alabama, and New England is
finally getting
snow, after one of the warmest
Decembers on
record.
Michigan's governor apologized
today for lead
contamination in the city of
Flint's drinking
water. And his environmental
chief resigned.
The city started drawing water
from the Flint
River last year to save money.
State officials
insisted it was safe, but the
water corroded
aging pipes and released lead.
Residents have
now been warned against drinking
unfiltered
tap water.
And Wall Street rallied on
higher oil prices,
plus upbeat economic reports.
The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 192
points to close
at 17720. The Nasdaq rose 67
points, and the
S&P 500 added nearly 22.
Still to come on the
"®MDNM/NewsHour": a
victory in the Iraqi city of
Ramadi; Guinea,
ground zero for the Ebola
outbreak, declared
free of the virus; a law to
prevent data breaches;
a drought in the heart of the
Caribbean; and
much more.
Now to the fight against ISIS
and the fate
of a key city, Ramadi.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins with this report.
MARGARET WARNER: It was a
triumphant tour
for the Iraqi prime minister.
Today, Haider
al-Abadi planted his country's
flag in the
city after government troops
retook its center.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (voice-over):
ISIS said they would fight in
Ramadi, but
they felt afraid. They didn't
fight. They
fled, and many of them were
killed.
MARGARET WARNER: It was a
seven-month slog
to this day. Islamic State
militants had captured
Ramadi, capital of the majority
Sunni Anbar
province, in May.
After encircling Ramadi for
weeks, last week,
Iraqi forces, backed by U.S.-led
coalition
airstrikes, finally launched an
assault into
the city. And over the weekend,
they made
a final push to seize its
central administration
complex.
Yesterday, troops celebrated as
they raised
the Iraqi flag above the key
government building.
Today, speaking from Baghdad,
U.S. Army Colonel
Steve Warren underscored the
role of U.S.-led
airpower in retaking the city.
COL. STEVE WARREN, U.S.
Spokesman for Operation
Against ISIS: I would agree that
probably
80 percent of the effort in
Ramadi was due
to coalition airstrikes. This is
significant.
And this is what really
facilitated or enabled
the Iraqi forces to move in.
It's using that
airpower as the force multiplier
that it really
can be.
MARGARET WARNER: Warren also
told reporters
that airstrikes over the past
month have killed
10 Islamic State leaders.
Several of them
were linked to the deadly
attacks in Paris,
and one had direct ties to the
ringleader
of the November 13 rampage.
Back in Ramadi, there is much
work left to
do. Iraqi forces have cleared
the areas shown
here in green, but militants
remain in other
parts of the city. Indeed, Abadi
and his convoy
were forced to leave one section
of Ramadi
after mortar rounds landed
nearby. Explosives
also must be removed from
streets and buildings.
Warren declined to predict how
long that would
take.
GWEN IFILL: Now we get the view
from Iraq
with Wall Street Journal
reporter Matt Bradley
in Baghdad. I spoke with him
earlier today.
Matt Bradley, thank you for
joining us.
So, this victory which people
have been talking
about as being imminent for
several days,
how significant is that it was
accomplished
without the help of Kurdish or
Shiite militia?
MATT BRADLEY, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
this was a -- this moment, this
victory, as
you described it, is really
vindicating for
the Iraqi military, and not just
for the Iraqi
military, but also for Prime
Minister Haider
Abadi and his partners in the
United States.
So, this is really -- as Haider
al-Abadi said,
this is really sort of paving
the way toward
Mosul, which will be a much,
much more difficult
fight.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned Haider
al-Abadi,
the prime minister. He made kind
of a victory
lap through Ramadi today. How
unusual was
that and how well was it
received?
MATT BRADLEY: Well, he's been
trying to do
that.
Haider al-Abadi, of course, like
any politician,
likes to get his picture in the
right place
at the right time. So this was
not unusual
for him. However, there were
some rumors that
were circulating this afternoon
that his convoy
had actually come under fire
from some missiles
from the enemy.
However, that was really denied.
That wasn't
the case at all.
But it just goes to show just
how dangerous
this situation is and the kind
of target that
he makes. He really is caught
between the
Islamic State on one side and
the Shiite militia
groups, who were very resentful
that they
weren't included in the fight
for Ramadi.
GWEN IFILL: So, in this victory
we have, have
Iraqi troops improved on their
performance
and, if so, how?
MATT BRADLEY: Yes, one of the
things that
the Iraqi troops were able to do
in Ramadi
that they were not able to do in
previous
battles was the combined use of
different
tactics.
They were able to call in
airstrikes from
the coalition and from Iraq's
military at
the right time for the right
targets. They
were able to combine the use of
sort of amphibious
assaults when they erected this
bridge downriver
from Ramadi in order to surprise
the enemy
from the south.
So they have been able to create
a combined
assault, which is sort of a
lofty military
theory that a lot of these Iraqi
soldiers
hadn't been exposed to until
U.S. training
just this past summer.
GWEN IFILL: What effect does it
have on morale,
not only for Iraqi citizens, but
also for
the Iraqi military?
MATT BRADLEY: Well, every
victory that happens
in this battle is a strategic
victory, because
what we're talking about, what
the Iraqi troops
really lack is morale, is this
esprit de corps,
is this feeling that they're
defending a nation,
that their nation is grateful,
that it's worth
saving and that their victories
are not going
to be usurped or eclipsed by
those of the
Shiite militias or the
Peshmerga.
So, really, this is a huge
moment, because
this is the first time that the
Iraqi military
has really achieved a victory
against the
Islamic State. Up until now,
it's only been
embarrassing defeats for the
Iraqi military.
GWEN IFILL: And, Matt, there has
been some
talk that the next goal is
Mosul, which seems
a far more difficult target. Is
that realistic?
MATT BRADLEY: Well, it's not
really realistic
at this present moment.
Mosul is several times the size
of Ramadi.
It's the second largest city in
Iraq. It's
Islamic State's de facto capital
in this country.
There is a huge number of
civilians still
in the city and there's a lot of
civilians
who have some amount of
affection or support
for Islamic State.
So, the Mosul fight will not be
nearly as
easy as the Ramadi fight, and
the Ramadi fight
wasn't easy at all, so, really,
it's just
going to get only more
difficult.
GWEN IFILL: Matt Bradley
reporting for us
tonight from Baghdad for The
Wall Street Journal,
thank you so much.
MATT BRADLEY: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time
in two years,
the country where the Ebola
outbreak began
can say it's free of the virus.
That's also
true for the region of West
Africa, where
more than 11,000 people have
died in the epidemic.
Ebola sickened more than 28,000
people across
10 countries, mostly in Africa.
But a long
international effort eventually
paid off.
William Brangham begins our look
at the lessons
learned and the challenges that
remain.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The outbreak
first began
in Eastern Guinea back in
December of 2013
and then spread to neighboring
Liberia and
Sierra Leone. More than 2,500
people died
in Guinea before it was fully
contained. And,
today, an estimated 6,000
children there are
orphans because of the epidemic.
But it's now been six weeks
since the last
known Ebola patient repeatedly
tested negative
for the virus. Reports from
Guinea today suggest
a mix of both celebration and
wariness.
Sheri Fink has chronicled the
impact of the
epidemic for The New York Times,
and was part
of the team who won the Pulitzer
Prize for
its coverage.
So, Sheri Fink, Guinea says no
more Ebola.
Tell us, how big a deal is this?
SHERI FINK, The New York Times:
It's a big
deal.
As you have said, it's been two
years since
experts believe that that first
case in a
little village in Guinea started
this epidemic.
That's a very long time. And
today marks the
date that all three of those
most affected
countries have broken that
original chain
of transmission, that
human-to-human transmission
that has led us to this day,
with thousands
of deaths and many, many
thousands of people
getting sick with Ebola.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is the
scientific community
pretty confident that we are in
fact at zero?
Liberia at one point was
declared Ebola-free,
and then some new cases erupted.
So how confident
can we be that this really is
it?
SHERI FINK: So, this has been
something that
we have learned this year.
In fact, people might even be
surprised Ebola
has slipped from the headlines,
that the transmissions
continued to go up until this
date. And that
is because there have been sort
of these cases
that nobody knew about of
potential Ebola
kind of hanging out in certain
parts of the
body that are immunologically
protected and
reemerging in some survivors,
causing these
little mini-outbreaks.
So, indeed, Liberia reached this
milestone
a few months ago and twice has
had small flare-ups
that are thought to be linked to
transmission
from survivors in very rare
cases thought
to be sexually transmitted, for
one thing.
So now the World Health
Organization is saying,
OK, human-to-human transmission
has stopped,
but Guinea will enter a 90-day
period of what
they're calling enhanced
surveillance to be
really on the lookout for
occasional sporadic
cases that could pop up and lead
to more cases.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Your reporting
over the
last months and year have
revealed that there
are some real problems with the
way the World
Health Organization responded to
this epidemic.
Can you tell us about some of
those -- some
of the problems that they had,
and how have
they been addressed?
SHERI FINK: Well, the World
Health Organization
has really been a punching bag
for this outbreak.
And it should be said that
nobody responded
very well at the beginning.
But, certainly, the World Health
Organization,
as that U.N. body that's in
charge of the
world's health, came in for a
lot of criticism,
and they said it was justified.
And numerous
groups have come out, experts,
trying to say,
what can we learn from this?
The essential fact was, early in
the outbreak,
the WHO failed to sort of
understand its gravity.
I mean, these cases popped up in
a part of
the world that hadn't been known
really to
have Ebola outbreaks in the
past, right at
the border of three countries,
and very quickly
had hit capital cities.
So there wasn't just enough of a
sense of
urgency in that very early
response, a sense
that this was different from the
WHO. Plus,
they had cut down their outbreak
response
units just before the outbreak
happened. This
was because, you know, they
hadn't had as
much money to work with, with
the global financial
crisis, and so they chose to cut
certain aspects
of their global health
portfolio.
Unfortunately, one of them was
outbreak response.
So now the focus is how to
strengthen that
in the future.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You reported
also that,
sometimes, political concerns
got in the way
of public health concerns.
Explain how that
happens.
SHERI FINK: So, the WHO is made
up of its
member countries.
And in the past, even with this
outbreak,
we saw that there is sort of a
punitive response
when a country has a dangerous
disease like
Ebola within its borders.
Airlines shut down
flights, countries pull out, and
the thought
is also that these countries put
pressure
on the local -- the regional WHO
offices.
They don't want a big deal to be
made of this
outbreak. So, looking forward, a
lot of these
groups are saying the WHO needs
to be protected
from that political pressure, so
that they
can address an outbreak, not
minimize it,
in the beginning, as well as the
other countries
of the world need to reward
countries that
are willing to come forward and
say, we have
got an outbreak.
And that reward is, you know,
immediate assistance
to fight the outbreak. More
broadly, health
systems really need to be
strengthened in
all these countries. These are
countries with
poor health systems to begin
with, and all
the countries of the world have
realized that
there is an interest in
strengthening those
health systems.
You know, that's partly to help
people, humanitarian,
but partly so that future
outbreaks of even
more dangerous, you know,
epidemics would
be stopped at their source.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Sheri Fink of
The New York Times, thank you so
much.
SHERI FINK: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Clearly, the best
way to stop
Ebola altogether would be
developing a vaccine.
And, in fact, more than a dozen
trials and
experiments are under way.
Earlier this year, our science
correspondent,
Miles O'Brien, reported on some
of those efforts
in West Africa and why the
search for a cure
has been so difficult.
This is an encore look from his
series Cracking
Ebola's Code.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's dark and
early in Freetown,
Sierra Leone. A team of
pharmacists is in
a nondescript government
building preparing
the day's supply of an
experimental vaccine
against Ebola.
The clock starts running when
they take the
vaccine out of a very deep
freeze. This is
likely the coldest spot in the
whole country.
The vaccine can only be thawed
out right before
it is injected, or it will lose
its potency,
and all of this will be a waste
of time, money
and hope.
So, right now, timing and
temperature are
absolutely critical. And then it
happens.
WOMAN: The power went out.
MILES O'BRIEN: Another reminder
of how hard
it is to conduct a high-tech
vaccine trial
in one of the poorest countries
on the planet.
But they are ready. They have
got two backup
generators for the building,
solar-charged
batteries, and, if all else
fails, a special
container that maintains about
100 degrees
below zero Fahrenheit for five
days without
power.
Pharmacist Morrison Jusu is
delivering the
vaccine three-and-a-half miles
across Freetown.
After a seemingly endless
national nightmare,
he carries a cooler full of
expectations.
He knows much is riding with
him.
MORRISON JUSU, Pharmacist: Some
people lost
family members. And some
families were essentially
wiped out as a result of this
thing. And if
this vaccine proves out to be
something that
prevents such in the future,
then it's -- it's
-- words cannot describe how
much relief that
would be to this community.
MILES O'BRIEN: While Jusu and
the vaccine
are wending their way, a line is
growing outside
their destination, Freetown's
Connaught Hospital.
The volunteers start showing up
before dawn.
They are health care workers.
This trial is
limited to them because they
are, by far,
the most at risk of contracting
Ebola virus
disease. Even though there is no
evidence
the vaccine poses any real
danger, they must
weigh the rumors and the
uncertainties.
MOHAMED SAMBOLA, Vaccine Trial
Volunteer (through
translator): Life is all about
risks. But
I believe it will be of help in
the job that
I do.
RUGIATU CONTEH, Vaccine Trial
Volunteer (through
translator): It is a high risk
for me. I believe
this can protect me from Ebola,
and that's
why I came here for this
vaccine.
MILES O'BRIEN: It wasn't always
this way.
The trial got off to a slow
start when it
began in April. People were too
afraid.
Dr. Mohamed Samai is one of the
principal
investigators.
DR. MOHAMED SAMAI, Provost,
College of Medicine
and Allied Health Sciences:
People said the
vaccine was the Ebola virus, so,
once you
get it, you become infected. So,
a lot of
people were not willing to come
forward there
in the first week to take the
vaccine, because
they thought they should wait
and see what
happens.
MILES O'BRIEN: The vaccine does
contain a
piece of the Ebola virus, a
protein. It's
enough to trick the body into
triggering its
natural defenses, but won't give
the recipient
Ebola virus disease.
On the wall in the lobby of the
hospital,
a spontaneous memorial to some
of the doctors
and nurses who died here during
the epidemic,
a grim reminder of what
motivates volunteers
like Richard Kanu.
RICHARD KANU, Vaccine Trial
Volunteer (through
translator): I became aware of
it through
my friends who got the shot
three days ago.
Since they're not having any
side effects,
I decided to come and have a go
at it myself,
because I feel it will protect
me.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kanu works on a
team that buries
the highly contagious dead. He
has been shunned
by friends, even forced out of
his own home.
RICHARD KANU (through
translator): I will
go back and tell them that I
have had the
vaccine and they should rest
assured that
I won't have the virus. I will
probably encourage
them to step forward as well.
MILES O'BRIEN: Bad traffic
delays Jusu's ride
to the hospital, but, when he
arrives, the
vaccine isn't spoiled, and the
volunteers
are ready. The nursing team
doesn't waste
any time prepping for the jabs.
Aruna Thorlie is a chlorine
sprayer who disinfects
Ebola treatment units.
Have you felt anything
different? Did it hurt,
anything?
ARUNA THORLIE, Vaccine Trial
Volunteer (through
translator): I feel the same as
I did before.
I hope and pray that it works.
MILES O'BRIEN: The vaccine is
made by Merck.
The trial is a partnership
between the Sierra
Leone Ministry of Health, the
U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and
Prevention and the
medical college in Freetown.
DR. MOHAMED SAMAI: Once we can
document the
effectiveness of the vaccine,
and we are now
sure that it can really protect
them, we can
move to another stage, where we
will look
at the community and the
population at large.
MILES O'BRIEN: Across the border
in Liberia,
a separate trial is testing the
same vaccine,
along with another one made by
GlaxoSmithKline.
It is open to all and based at
this hospital
in Monrovia.
In the darkest days of the
crisis here in
Liberia, a senior doctor and
nurse here at
Redemption Hospital contracted
Ebola virus
disease, and they subsequently
died. Many
of the health care workers here
became afraid
to come to work and the hospital
had to close
for a time. In all, 13 members
of the hospital
staff died here.
DR. MARK KIEH, Redemption
Hospital: It was
scary. It was confusing
MILES O'BRIEN: DR. Mark Kieh is
the site physician
for the trial.
So far, there are 1, 500
volunteers. He is
carefully watching them for side
effects.
So far, so good.
DR. MARK KIEH: Those we have
seen are expected
side effects of fever, muscle
pain, pain at
the injection sites, some joint
pain, some
-- few people with rashes that
resolve over
time.
MILES O'BRIEN: The trial is run
by Liberia's
Ministry of Health and the U.S.
National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious
Disease.
Its director, Dr. Anthony Fauci,
has intense,
intimate understanding of the
ravages of Ebola.
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, Director,
National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases: At least
in the most recent patient that
we took care
of, that that's about as sick as
you can get
without dying.
MILES O'BRIEN: On March 14,
2015, he suited
up to treat a U.S. health care
worker who
became infected in Sierra Leone,
and was airlifted
to the NIH hospital outside
Washington, where
he received the highest level of
intensive
care possible. It kept him alive
while his
body mounted its own defense.
It was touch and go for a week,
but he survived.
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI: All of the
people who have
recovered from Ebola, even those
who have
been very ill, it was their
immune system
that ultimately suppressed and
eliminated
the virus.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is why Fauci
and others
are optimistic they have a found
a way to
stop Ebola its tracks. The human
body can
create the antibodies to fight
off Ebola,
but usually not fast enough.
An effective vaccine creates an
army of Ebola
antibodies that can stop the
virus before
it stampedes through the body.
But here is
the ironic rub.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN, Director,
Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention:
If we are
successful in controlling Ebola,
we won't
be successful in determining
whether the vaccines
are effective at preventing
Ebola.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Tom Frieden
is director
of the CDC. Ebola cases in
Liberia are now
at zero, and Sierra Leone is
close behind.
If no one is getting Ebola, you
can't tell
for sure if the vaccine is
protective, so
they have to rely on other
evidence.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: So, the
trials under way
now will at least tell us
whether they're
safe, and they will tell us
whether they lead
to an immune reaction.
We wish we were further along
with the vaccine,
but it's very difficult to do
research in
the middle of an epidemic.
MILES O'BRIEN: In Freetown,
pharmacist Morrison
Jusu is among those who
scrambled to get this
trial under way at all. He is
anxious to know
if the hard work will pay off.
MORRISON JUSU: We are really
looking forward
to it being successful, so that
someday in
the future, we will be able to
say, yes, I
was a part of that team and I
contributed.
So, it will be a great feeling
then.
MILES O'BRIEN: The answer will
have to wait,
but no one doubts the vaccine
will meet its
viral foe someday.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Freetown,
Sierra Leone.
GWEN IFILL: Before the president
and Congress
left town for the holidays, they
managed to
GWEN IFILL: Before the president
and Congress
left town for the holidays, they
managed to
enact a massive 2,000-page
package of spending
and tax cuts. Typically, these
laws draw attention
only for the chaos they create,
like shutting
down the government.
But there's a lot more deep
inside, in this
case, a significant and
controversial new
law governing cyber-security and
Internet
data. The new law encourages
private companies
to share data about cyber-hacks
with the government.
It protects companies from
liability, and
it also allows data to shared
with other companies
and with the Department of
Homeland Security.
Lawmakers from both parties said
it was a
good deal.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: If
someone sees a particular virus
or harmful
cyber-signature, they should
tell others,
so they can protect themselves.
That's what
this bill does.
REP. DEVIN NUNES (R),
California: We believe
that sharing is an area where
you really can't
do any harm. It doesn't hurt
anybody to have
a way to talk. But, right now,
they can't
even talk.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine:
Does it make
sense that we require one case
of measles
to be reported to a federal
government agency,
but not a cyber-attack?
GWEN IFILL: But there are some
security advocates
and privacy groups who say the
law manages
to go too far and not quite far
enough.
Jeffrey Brown has that debate.
JEFFREY BROWN: To understand
more, we're joined
by James Lewis, senior fellow
for the Center
for Strategic and International
Studies, and
Elissa Shevinsky, founder of
JeKuDo, a tech
start-up designed to provide
private communications
to customers.
And welcome to both of you.
James Lewis, let me start with
you.
The proponents of this in
Congress say that
this will allow the government
to coordinate
information, and they think this
is the best
way to do it, and then push back
to other
companies, push out information
about how
to prevent it in the future.
JAMES LEWIS, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: You know, it's a really
good first
step, and it's great that
Congress managed
to pass a law, almost amazing.
But we have a lot of work to do.
And in cyber-security
in general, this is a little
step. In information-sharing,
a lot of things have to come
together for
it to work. We have tried this
for a long
time. It's hard to share
information, classified
information, private
information. We will
see where we are a year from
now, but a good
first step, a long way to go.
JEFFREY BROWN: From a security
perspective,
what's the goal here, and how
would the new
law try to achieve it?
JAMES LEWIS: This is something
the U.S. has
been trying to do for almost 18
years now,
and it's never worked.
The theory is that, if you
remove some of
the obstacles to sharing
information, people
will do more, will know what the
threats are,
and maybe they will take action.
But that's
where the bill falls apart.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's where you
see a problem
on it?
JAMES LEWIS: Yes.
There is no incentive for people
to use information.
This doesn't change -- it's like
me telling
you, hey, the Chinese are trying
to hack into
your computer, be ready. It
doesn't really
affect what people are going to
do to defend
themselves. And it keeps us in a
reactive
posture.
JEFFREY BROWN: Elissa Shevinsky,
a lot of
people have raised privacy
concerns in all
this. You come at it from that
angle. Explain
the problems you see.
ELISSA SHEVINSKY, Founder,
JeKuDo Privacy
Company: There are numerous
problems with
this bill.
It doesn't actually help us with
security.
Rather, it's more information
gathering for
the government. And it makes it
difficult
for executives like myself to
actually safeguard
the privacy of our customers.
In the past, we have been able
to rely on
our privacy policies to create
trust with
our customers. We can say the
privacy policy
says that we can't share your
data with third
parties. With the CISA bill,
that will no
longer apply. Now companies will
be coerced
into sharing their customer data
with the
government.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you say
coerced. Isn't
this voluntary?
ELISSA SHEVINSKY: They say that
it's voluntary,
but if the government comes to
you and says
that they want information, it's
tricky to
stand up and say no.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Jim Lewis,
what do you
see about that?
JAMES LEWIS: This is DHS we're
talking about.
And it's very hard for them to
coerce anyone.
So, it's voluntary.
That's actually my concern, is,
since it's
voluntary, people are unlikely
to do anything.
This doesn't expand the
information that companies
are gathering. It's their
decision whether
or not they share it, and
there's no authority
in the bill for the government
to coerce anyone.
So, I hadn't even thought about
coercion as
a problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: What would you
like to see
happen?
JAMES LEWIS: We're going to have
to tackle
some hard issues.
We're going to have to tackle
what is the
role of the military, where do
we need to
regulate, and how do we work
with other countries
to come to some understanding on
what we should
or shouldn't do in cyberspace.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do you see
the government
saying to companies here?
JAMES LEWIS: What they're saying
is, you either
know than we do, which could be
true. You
certainly know different things
than we do.
And so if you can give us that
threat information,
and we can share back with you,
it will help
everyone.
It could work. I mean, it hasn't
worked so
far, but that's the theory.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Elissa
Shevinsky, where
do you see this line, from where
you sit,
this line of security and
privacy?
ELISSA SHEVINSKY: We need to
actually build
and enforce real security. That
requires encrypting
our data.
It requires taking new measures
in the government.
So many government offices were
hacked this
last year. We need to review
their security
practices if they are going to
be holding
more citizen data.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that could
be right.
This is a very evolving threat,
right, both
to the private sector and
government.
ELISSA SHEVINSKY: That's right.
And this bill
doesn't address that.
This bill is information
gathering for DHS.
And it doesn't actually support
what we need
to improve the security of our
companies and
government
agencies.
JEFFREY BROWN: What would you
like to see?
What kind of system would you
like to see
in place?
ELISSA SHEVINSKY: We need to
actually improve
the security of how we're
storing and managing
data, who has access to that
data. More threat
intelligence won't help us,
because we already
know what the threats look like.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jim Lewis, is it
correct that
there is still a lot to work
out? There's
still a lot we don't know about
how this is
going to be implemented.
JAMES LEWIS: Yes. The bill has a
lot of reporting
dates and actions for
implementation.
I think that, you know, the
debate over the
-- between the privacy community
and the agencies
was, where does the information
go? They settled
on DHS. And now DHS has to
prepare itself.
So, there is a lot of action
here. Right now,
this doesn't change anything.
Maybe three
months from now, we will see
some improvement.
JEFFREY BROWN: How would you
judge success
in something like this? How do
we know?
JAMES LEWIS: Unfortunately, the
metrics are
really simple, how many people
are getting
in, how much data is flowing
out. And if the
numbers aren't going down, it's
not working.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, James
Lewis, Elissa
Shevinsky, thank you both very
much.
JAMES LEWIS: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
winner of
this year's National Book Award
for Poetry;
and why there are still so few
women in science.
For the entire summer of 2015,
the residents
of Puerto Rico lived under
drought conditions.
Water was rationed, and, in some
towns, it
was only available in public
places.
As special correspondent Chris
Bury reports,
the rains have returned, but the
island's
recession and debt crisis remain
a burden
on the water infrastructure.
CHRIS BURY: The remnants of
Hurricane Danny
and Tropical Storm Erika that
drenched Puerto
Rico in late summer were, in
fact, a great
relief for this tropical island
3,500 square
miles surrounded by the blue
Caribbean.
In a new era of greatly reduced
rainfall and
extended dry spells, the most
precious commodity
these days is water, clean,
fresh water. But
for nearly five months in the
summer and early
fall, the most populous parts of
the country
depended on 1,600 gallon tanks
of water like
this. At one point, more than
100 of these
tanks helped Puerto Ricans cope
with the worst
drought in more than 20 years.
Near San Juan, Juliana Chiclana
was filling
up water jugs for a household
that includes
eight grandchildren.
JULIANA CHICLANA, Puerto Rico
(through translator):
One is emotionally affected by
the drought
itself, which, at least for me,
I have never
experienced a drought this big.
CHRIS BURY: In this town, the
tap water was
on for 24 hours, then off for 72
hours. And
so families had to load up with
enough to
get through three days without
tap water at
home.
JULIANA CHICLANA (through
translator): In
a way, I'm grateful that it's
three, because
they had announced that it was
going to be
five days.
CHRIS BURY: The rationing, in
force from mid-May
until September, was the most
stringent ever
imposed. Just outside San Juan,
the Torres
family lived for months with
those restrictions.
So, we have the kitchen without
water?
DEHUEL TORRES, Puerto Rico:
That's it.
CHRIS BURY: On the day we
visited, water rationing
was in effect for the entire
neighborhood.
Here, they could turn on the
taps every other
day.
What happens if you try and turn
on the water?
DEHUEL TORRES: Well, if you turn
on the water,
we have no water at this point.
We are in
a drought, right now rationing.
We have 24
hours previous -- we got one day
with water,
another day with no water.
CHRIS BURY: Twenty-four hours
on, 24 hours
off?
DEHUEL TORRES: Twenty-four hours
on, 24 hours
off.
CHRIS BURY: So, like thousands
of others here,
Dehuel and his wife, Jessica,
had to cope
creatively. In the bathrooms, he
installed
22-gallon tanks for cleaning and
hygiene.
DEHUEL TORRES: Just to use our
toilet in a
regular basis.
CHRIS BURY: And to bathe, they
relied on this
small camp shower. Dehuel filled
it from a
big barrel that sits outside in
the sun to
keep the water warm, then hung
it up in the
bathroom, where the showers, by
necessity,
were brief.
DEHUEL TORRES: There you go. We
got our shower.
CHRIS BURY: And in the kitchen,
some more
improvisation. Dehuel attached a
faucet to
this big bucket. That's how they
saved enough
water to do the dishes on those
days when
the tap ran dry.
JESSICA TORRES, Puerto Rico: We
have to turn
it off. Then clean each cup or
dish one by
one to save water, then turn it
up to rinse
it.
CHRIS BURY: For the Torres
family, the drought
not only meant a dramatic change
in their
daily lives. It's cost them more
money, too.
JESSICA TORRES, It's more
expensive. We may
have to buy another container to
supply our
needs, so that's another expense
that we have
to look into it.
CHRIS BURY: In much of Puerto
Rico, the drought
created a cottage industry of
coping. Hardware
stores hawked buckets with
faucets already
bolted on. This sign said,
"Don't stay soapy."
Along highways, vendors sold the
bucket contraptions,
too, $15 apiece. And on rooftops
everywhere,
plastic cisterns stored extra
water to ride
out the rationing.
For many businesses, such as
this seafood
restaurant and bar, the drought
made life
more difficult and more
expensive. Employees
washed dishes the old-fashioned
way. Plastic
cups replaced glass ones and the
restaurant
relied on delivered ice.
LUIS TORRES, Puerto Rico: Like
you see, it's
brand-new.
CHRIS BURY: Outside, manager
Luis Torres showed
us two new 600-gallon cisterns
that stored
water for the days when it
wasn't available.
How important is water to your
business?
LUIS TORRES: We can't run if we
don't have
water. If we want to open the
doors, we have
to have water.
CHRIS BURY: Many of the island's
tourist resorts
were relatively unaffected,
because their
water flows from a remote
aqueduct, not local
reservoirs.
But the lack of water took its
toll on agriculture.
The drought dried up the
pastures where cattle
typically graze. In much of the
country, milk
production fell. This farm grows
plantains,
mangoes, avocados and other
fruit.
But farmer Daniel Cadenas says
the dry weather
stunted their growth.
DANIEL CADENAS, Farmer: There
might be as
many fruit maybe, but they tend
to be smaller.
And then a lot of things can
die. Let's say,
the platanos, usually, they
definitely need
water.
JOSE MOLINELLI-FREYTES,
University of Puerto
Rico: These two sections are the
ones that
are very dry.
CHRIS BURY: Jose
Molinelli-Freytes, a professor
of environmental science at the
University
of Puerto Rico, blamed a
confluence of factors,
including El Nino, the unusually
warm currents
in the Pacific that affect
weather globally
and reduce precipitation in the
Caribbean.
Another factor, hot dust from
the Sahara Desert
that dissipates storm clouds
before they reach
Puerto Rico, all part of a
changing climate.
JOSE MOLINELLI-FREYTES: The
models predict,
for example, that, for the
Caribbean, we're
going to have 20 percent
reduction in rainfall
by the middle of the century.
And it will
be intensifying.
CHRIS BURY: And that, he says,
doesn't bode
well for Puerto Rico's aging and
crumbling
water system, that the dams need
maintenance,
that the reservoirs have too
much silt and
sediment, reducing their
capacity, and that
old water pipes routinely
springs leaks, such
as this one bubbling up on a
city street.
JOSE MOLINELLI-FREYTES: When it
is pumped
through the distribution system,
more than
half of the water is lost due to
aging infrastructure
and leaking.
CHRIS BURY: More than half?
JOSE MOLINELLI-FREYTES: More
than half.
CHRIS BURY: But Puerto Rico,
suffering from
a recession and deep in debt, is
too starved
for cash to even partially plug
the leaks.
And the rationing drained
revenue from the
island's water utility, which is
headed by
Alberto Lazaro.
ALBERTO LAZARO, Puerto Rico
Aqueduct and Sewer
Authority: It's costing us quite
a bit. It's
costing us about $12 million per
month. That
cost is mostly income or
revenues that are
not being received, because, if
we are shutting
off services for two days at a
time, then
people are going to use less
water.
CHRIS BURY: Dehuel and Jessica
Torres told
us the drought was another
burden to shoulder
in a difficult economy, one more
reason they
have thought about leaving for
the mainland
United States.
JESSICA TORRES: With this
situation of uncertainty
that we're experiencing right
now, the drought,
the government not actually
helping us, it
creates a lot of uncertainty in
the people.
And people might say they have
the option.
We're not in another country. We
have the
option. We're American citizens.
CHRIS BURY: Even the scientist
who studies
the climate here was counting on
nature to
intervene.
Is Puerto Rico praying for a
good hurricane?
JOSE MOLINELLI-FREYTES: I will
say that a
good hurricane that pass by and
brings a lot
of rain, that will be a
blessing, if that
occurs.
CHRIS BURY: The late summer
storms did dump
enough rain on Puerto Rico so
that the water
authority eventually ended the
rationing.
But now the dry season has
begun, and Puerto
Rico will need more rain next
year to prevent
another drought that will send
the residents
of this tropical island
scrambling for that
most precious commodity: clean,
fresh water.
I'm Chris Bury for "PBS
NewsHour" in Carolina,
Puerto Rico.
I'm Chris Bury for "PBS
NewsHour" in Carolina,
Puerto Rico.
GWEN IFILL: When the 2015
National Book Awards
were announced last month, Robin
Coste Lewis,
a fellow at the University of
Southern California,
was awarded the poetry prize for
her first
collection of poems, "Voyage of
the Sable
Venus."
Jeff is back with their
conversation, conducted
at the Miami Book Festival.
JEFFREY BROWN: There are many
personal poems
in this.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS, National Book
Award for
Poetry Winner: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But the long poem
that anchors
the collection, the "Voyage of
the Sable Venus,"
has a very particular focus,
right?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The history of
African-American
women, their bodies in art.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Yes.
It's actually the history of
black female
bodies in art. So, that's part
of why I did
the project. It exceeds the
national boundaries
and even the history of America
by several
millennia. It goes back even to
38,000 years,
into prehistoric images of black
female figures.
JEFFREY BROWN: And why? Why did
you want to
explore that?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Well, I
didn't want it
to go back that far. I didn't
know that would
happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: And then once
I started
doing research -- and I have a
background
in ancient languages, and so, of
course, I
went into the ancient world as
well to see
what was going on there.
And, of course, I found images
of black women
in subservient positions, or as
the tripod
of a lamp, or the handle of a
razor blade
or handle of a knife. And I
thought, well,
how far back does it go? How
long have we
been doing this to each other?
That was my
primary question.
And everywhere I looked,
regardless of the
time period or the continent, it
was happening.
And so then I couldn't look
away. I had to
keep going.
JEFFREY BROWN: But why is that
poetry? Why
through poetry? Because that's a
huge subject.
It's a fascinating, important
subject.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Right. Right.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: But why through
poetry?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Because
poetry is song.
Poetry, first and foremost, is
the lyric.
It's the music.
And epic is one of the oldest
forms we have
as human beings. And I thought
that it would
be really helpful and also
mirror the history
itself if I showed -- if I tried
to capture
this history of how we have
looked at black
women visually in epic form.
It made sense to me, as opposed
to writing,
say, an essay. I mean, essays
are fine. I
love them. And I write them as
well. But to
do it with poem, it's like
poetry is almost
primordial for us, like
breathing. Everybody
-- lullabies. You know, we all
know what it
means to be sung to.
And poetry is very close to
that. So, I wanted
do it that way, so I could keep
my reader
close. I didn't want to put
distance between
me and my reader.
JEFFREY BROWN: Voyage of the
Sable Venus is
an actual -- is a painting,
right?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: It's an
etching, yes, from
the 18th century, 1787, I think.
JEFFREY BROWN: An etching, yes.
A kind of allegory of a black
woman on the
passage, right, from Africa to
the Caribbean?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Right. Right.
So, it's a redux of Botticelli's
Venus on
the Half Shell, but, in this
case, it's a
black woman on the clam shell.
And she's being
drawn to the water by Cupid and
Triton or
Neptune. I'm not sure. But
instead of Neptune
having a trident, right, he has
a slab of
the (INAUDIBLE) so it turns out
to be a pro-slavery
image.
And it is based on a poem, also
"Voyage of
the Sable Venus," titled "Voyage
of the Sable
Venus," that speaks about how --
it's a pro-rape
poem. It's disgusting, how to
rape a white
woman or a black woman slave at
night is the
same, because you can't see
their bodies,
1782.
So, when I heard the title,
"Voyage of the
Sable Venus," this is the whole
experience
of looking at that experience,
where you're
both completely compelled --
it's a gorgeous
image -- until you realize that
it's pro-slavery.
And then the title itself was so
gorgeous
to me, "Voyage of the Sable
Venus." Right?
So, the complete contradiction
of what the
image performed and what the
title said seemed
to me to be a cue to look
further. And so
the more I looked and the more
titles I found,
the weirder it got and the more
interesting
it got.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you -- is it
important for
you, at least for you work, that
poetry connect
with things, with history,
with...
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Yes, it is.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Yes, because,
I mean, this
is just me, right?
I'm not saying that all poets
should do this,
but I feel like I'm here in the
body at a
particular time, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: And that time
is completely
impacted by very large and very
small movements
by human beings, whether it's on
grand historical
scale like wars, or small
historical scales
like, I had a baby.
All those things are about our
time. They're
all impacted by how we treat
each other, how
we live in the world. So it's
important to
me that that be reflected in my
work, for
sure. Otherwise, I feel like I'm
wasting the
reader's time. I don't want to
waste my readers'
time ever. My readers are very
important to
me.
So, if I'm going to -- I don't
want to pretend
that they're not there. I don't
want my work
to pretend that they're not
there. I want
them to know at, every moment,
I'm thinking
of them. I don't necessarily
need to please
them. I don't necessarily need
to entertain
them, but I take very seriously,
with great
respect.
JEFFREY BROWN: Engage them.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: With great
respect.
And I also assume that my
readers have great
intelligence, so I also don't
want to talk
down to them. And so all those
things go into
how I present the work on the
page.
JEFFREY BROWN: And who do you
look to for
influences?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Oh, that's
such a hard
question.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes?
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Yes.
I mean, who don't I look to for
influences.
On the one hand I look to, you
know, visual
artists. And there is a long
list of those
people. And then there's
musicians, with whom
I can't live out, Shirley Holme
(ph), Charlie
Parker. I don't know. You name
it. Astor Piazzolla,
someone was talking about his
work today.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: And I look to
poets, sure,
but it's just a large, lush,
saturated field
that I go to.
Toni Morrison was a big
influence on my work
since I was a teenager, what she
did with
English. I joke that I think she
speaks 20
Englishes simultaneously, that
she knows how
to do that. It's just huge. It's
a long list,
yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Robin
Coste Lewis,
her book, the "Voyage of the
Sable Venus,"
winner of the National Book
Award for Poetry.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Congratulations.
ROBIN COSTE LEWIS: Thank you so
much.
JEFFREY BROWN: Thanks a lot.
GWEN IFILL: And now we turn to
one of our
"NewsHour" Essays.
Women in this country earn just
over 57 percent
of bachelor's degrees in all
fields, yet they
receive less than 20 percent of
degrees conferred
in computer science, engineering
and physics.
A recent study by the American
Association
of University Women also found
that, in 2013,
26 percent of all computing jobs
were held
by women, a drop from 35 percent
in 1990.
We asked Eileen Pollack, one of
the first
two women to receive a
bachelor's of science
degree in physics at Yale, and
who now teaches
creative writing at the
University of Michigan,
to share an idea from her latest
book, "The
Only Woman in the Room: Why
Science Is Still
a Boys' Club."
Here's an encore look.
EILEEN POLLACK, Author, "The
Only Woman in
the Room: Why Science Is Still a
Boys' Club":
When I was growing up, I wanted
passionately
to be a physicist.
But in seventh grade, the
principal wouldn't
let me enter the accelerated
track in science
and math. "Girls never go on to
careers in
those subjects," he told my
mother. "Besides,"
he said, "getting skipped ahead
in science
and math would ruin my social
life."
As a result, I arrived at Yale
in 1974 far
behind my male classmates. I
failed my first
physics midterm, and my parents
urged me to
switch majors. But I worked
incredibly hard
and didn't give up. Four years
later, I graduated
with a nearly perfect GPA, an A
in a graduate
course in gravitational theory,
and two original
research papers.
Even so, I didn't go on. As
ridiculous as
it seems now, I assumed that if
I were talented
enough to apply to graduate
school, one of
my professors would have let me
know.
Since then, I have done a lot of
research
on gender bias in the sciences,
and I'm sorry
to report not much has changed.
When parents
ask why there are still so few
girls in advanced
science and math classes in high
school, I
tell them, because girls still
need way more
encouragement than boys to take
those courses.
We still raise girls to look to
other people
for assurance they are
attractive and smart,
while boys are raised to
determine their own
value. Many girls are still made
to feel it's
not feminine to be good at
science or math.
And if a girl complains about
how hard her
AP calculus course is, her
parents are more
likely to let her drop it than
if her brother
voices the same complaint. As a
result, by
the time they get to college,
most girls won't,
or can't, sign up for rigorous
courses in
science or math. Those who do
often find themselves
unprepared or lacking in
confidence.
What delivers the one-two punch
that knocks
so many women and minorities out
of STEM fields
is that scientists have this
strange belief
that, if you need to be
encouraged, you aren't
talented or dedicated enough to
be one of
them. If you flunk your first
physics or calculus
midterm, you deserve to be
weeded out.
What they don't realize is that
young women
and students of color grow up in
a society
that fails to encourage and
often actively
discourages them from thinking
of themselves
as scientists. Ask most people
to picture
a physicist, and they will
imagine Albert
Einstein or Sheldon from "The
Big Bang Theory."
My parents didn't know how to
provide me with
the encouragement I needed to
achieve my dreams.
But the solution isn't rocket
science. If
your daughter finds herself in a
course designed
to weed her out, cheer her on,
urge her to
seek extra help, and give her a
giant pat
on the back for having made it
so far, despite
all the discouragement she
already has overcome.
GWEN IFILL: And a news update
before we leave
you.
Former New York Governor George
Pataki is
dropping his 2016 presidential
bid. Pataki
reportedly told supporters today
he is suspending
his campaign. And he will air a
special message
in New Hampshire, Iowa and South
Carolina
later tonight. He is the fifth
Republican
to drop out, leaving 12 in the
race.
On the "NewsHour" online, 38
million people
are expected to fly U.S.
airlines this holiday
season. That demand increases
the likelihood
you might get bumped, even when
you have a
confirmed reservation. But there
is one carrier
that lets you decide how much
your seat and
your time is worth. See how
Delta lets its
passengers bid on travel
vouchers when it
overbooks. That story is on our
Making Sense
page.
And with the GOP field now down
to an even
dozen, see how well you remember
the year
in politics. Take "NewsHour"
political director's
Lisa Desjardins' quiz. I will
bet you can
do better than I did. You can
find it on our
home page.
All that more is at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, author Michael
Pollan's new
documentary on the dangers of
processed food.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.